Every recursive function needs to have something called a base case or a stop point.
Remember my example at the beginning where I showed you how to recursively check out all the folders
in one of our projects we have to tell the program hey if this subfolder we're going to no longer has
any more folders stop if this stop wasn't there the function would just keep running.
So recursive functions have two paths.
One is the recursive case that is call the function again and run it.
And then the base case that is stop calling the function.
Is nothing more to search.
So how can we add this feature of telling the function Hey quit it you're being ridiculous right now
you need to stop.
Well we can do something like this.
We can create a counter and we'll say this counter is zero.
And we can add a conditional statement will say that if the counter is greater than 3 in that case just
return Done.
Otherwise we'll call inception.
But we also want to increment the counter by 1.
So if I click run here well I have to call the function first let's say inception if I call this function
right now what do you think will happen.
Pause a video.
Think about it because I'm about to click run in three to one
I get undefined.
Is that what you expected.
Just to show you something if I comment this code out and we just do this Inception where we just keep
calling inception inception and perhaps do a console log here saying hello and I click run I get maximum
call stack size exceeded OK.
We know by looking at this function this version of the function that it's never going to get to console
log because as soon as it hits the first line of the function it's going to go back and say oh I'm calling
this and then kind of go here is just going to bounce back and forth back and forth never getting to
console log.
But if we go back to what we have before.
Well our function clearly has ended.
It hasn't done stack overflow and at one point it's ended because we increment the counter.
So let me console all log here are counter and make sure that this works.
If I click run I get 0 1 2 3 4 when it gets to 4.
Counter is greater than 3.
So we're returning done.
But why is there no done here.
And this is a great illustration of how recursion works.
I'm going to copy this code
and go back to our browser over here.
Let me refresh this page to make sure that you have a clear global variable and I'm going to copy and
paste inception this time around I'm going to add the debugger keyword so that we can debug our code
and go step by step through it.
Let's run inception and see what happens.
All right we're back to our debugger.
We see that we have the call stack here.
Inception has just been called by me and I also open up this little tab called scope for our case.
We want to just open up the script scope.
It shows us what variables we have available to us in this case we have a counter which is your.
So I'm going to click.
Step over and it's going to say hey we have counter is equal to zero.
Is that greater than three.
No I'm going to skip over Inkerman counter and run and separate we see that that's happened.
Counter has now been incremented because we've gone through this line and now we go to Inception.
We're going to run the function again and you'll notice that the call stack when I click this is going
to increase
and we're going to go one more time countries now one Nope don't return anything yet incrementing counter.
You'll see counter goes to two and we're going to run inception again.
And we keep going once more passing through Connard becomes three adding inception to the stack and
then one more time three is not greater than three.
So we go one more time calling inception adding into the stack.
We now have these many stacks counters at four and then we step over here counter is now four which
is greater than three.
We're finally going to enter the if condition that's going to return done for us.
Let's see what happens here.
I'm going to click next.
And I click Next again.
Look at that.
We have a local variable now that has return value done.
We've now returned done and we're no longer going to call inception the call stack is now going to start
popping off these functions because it's going to say oh we have a return keyword.
I'm going to stop whatever I'm doing at the bottom here and return from this function.
So this inception function is going to get return done but notice what happens next.
Though I get return value undefined Azari popped off the top item from inception from the call stack
and if I keep popping things from the call stack the return value is undefined.
And that's why we get.
Now why is that.
Well if we go back to our function well you just saw was us essentially doing this we called inception
once twice three times and then four times.
And within here when we finally got here we said oh return done.
So this inception function turns into dun and then we go to this function.
Now the problem with this and I know the tsking it confusing is that once we returned once we popped
off the stack and we're now at this part of inception but this inception never returns anything.
When a function doesn't return anything it just returns on to find.
So we need to keep telling it to return this done.
And bubble it up towards the very end.
And this is something that you have to keep in mind with recursion.
There is usually a base case and you always want to make sure you return so that the value that you
want gets bubbled up all the way to talk.
In our case all we need to do is say return inception this way this inception knows to return whatever
its result was which was done and this inception knows to result to return whatever this result was
which again is done.
And so on and so forth until we get done back.
Let's run this again.
All right.
And I have to call the function was to again inception and run and we're done very very nice.
If I go back here and go back to the cons. I encourage you to try this out this time adding the return
keyword to Inception and running through the debugger to see what happens.
But what I just showed you is all you need to build recursive functions.
You have three rules.
One is to identify the base case two is to identify the recursive case.
So we've identified the base case went to stop the recursive case.
That is when Konner is less than three.
And then finally our third step is to get closer and closer and return when needed.
And that usually you have two returns
for the base case and the recursive case because you want to return something at the end of the function.
So let's comment this out.
We have an idea of how recursion works the function simply gets closer and closer and closer to the
base case.
And once it gets to the base case it finally returns and pops functions off the stack but that's enough
talking for me.
I think it's time for us to do some coding exercises to get really familiar with this topic.
I'll see in the next one.
Babai.